---
layout: post
title: Papert, Lego, and Mindstorms
---

For Allison's Critical Theory class we were asked to read the intro and first 3 chapters of Mindstorms by Seymour Papert. In some ways, it was impressive to see what an astute vision of the future they had in 1980 of some of the events and possiblities that were unfolding.  At the same time, one critical thesis of these chapters was that computers would improve children's understanding of math and logic because now children would have a context for thinking about math that was readily available and a part of their lives. 

I think this assumption, and optimism, missed two key points. First, that as we improved computation, the mathematical parts of computers would become buried in the device and the way most people would interact with computers would not involve math nor logic. Second, that we're already surrounded by objects where math is deeply embedded, like the gears that he mentioned, the changing length of the day during the year, the rising of the tides, or many other patterns. But most people don't see the inherent math and just take the patterns for granted. 

In some ways, we now use computers, laptops, and smart phones the same way we interact we natural phenomena. We don't need to know how the sun moves to expect that it will rise each day and we don't need to know how our bodies work to breathe, eat, or walk. Similarly, we don't need to know how our computer works to send an email, use Facebook, create illustrations in Illustrator, or work on spreadsheets. 

A couple questions come out of this. First, which I'm asking somewhat to be provocative but also to question fundamental assumptions is, does it really matter? To be clear, I love math a lot. I think it's beautiful and empowering. I think anybody can learn it, and learning it can and should be a good experience of problem solving and being human. But, in some ways maybe it is ok if we use hardware and software without understanding how they work. Maybe? We can be wonderful humans without knowing how our body works and we can love the sun, the tides, and the seasons without knowing the math or science behind them. I still think we should know those things and learn them. But, being a part of the world or using machines seems in some ways different than understanding how these work? Second, because these machines are something we build, should we expose how they work in the way we use the device? Lastly, I agree that computers should enable a different type of learning. I like the idea of the child teaching the machine. But, what's the best way to do now what they were trying to do with Logo? How can we learn from Logo to help empower people to explore, experiment, and learn through teaching the machine? Is it something that was wrong with Logo or something wrong with how we thought about and used Logo?
