---
layout: post
title: Day 7 Sound
---

### Nathan & sound
Really amazing conversation with Nathan, who works with sound professionally, about sound. 

Some of the ideas were things that I sort of knew, like that sound is air moving, in a head-nodding "oh yes, sound is waves" sort of way. But, that I hadn't thought about what that really meant. And, I certainly didn't have a vocabulary to talk about sound, like the envelope. Or hadn't put the pieces together, like thinking about why you can feel base in your chest. All in all, it was super fun to hear somebody who has such a deep understanding describe what sound really is and how to think about it.

* Sound is composed of many sounds, many waves. Even strumming a taught string has multiple overlapping sounds: the sound of your thumb against the string, the resulting “fundamental” resonance, the associated “harmonics” since the string is also vibrating at shorter distances, and the fact that not all these harmonics are multiples of 1/2. 

* Describing the difference between the sound of a bike crashing and hands rubbing - and translating that to differences in the sound waves. The sound waves have amplitude, frequency, and a sense of time/duration. Does it start fast (like a crash) or slower? Does it sustain? How many sounds make up what you hear? 

* Relationship between sound and vibration… very low sounds that you can feel in your chest resonating as much as you can hear with your ears.

* Sounds have an “envelope” including “attack”, “sustain”, “decay”, and “release.” 

* All sound is air moving and pressure changing. Really. 

* As you lengthen the frequency, you get below the window we can hear… and at longer and longer frequencies eventually what you’re talking about is weather.

* Fourier: any waveform, every very complex, can be described as the sum of sin waves. This is sound. Synthesizers use this. 

* Very cool to look at the wave as you hear the sound. For me, this makes it easier to hear the sound and notice what I’m hearing. Interesting to see that you can graph with time on the x axis and ?amplitude? on the y… or with frequency on the x axis and ? on the y. 

* It is so amazing that we can hear and make any sense of what we hear when you think about the fact that it's just us sensing air moving and pressure changing. Seriously, our ears and brain are amazing.

It was especially wonderful to see how Nathan used the soundscape and objects around us to make his points. For example, contrasting the bike falling to a sound he could make with his hands, or finding a string he could tie to the table leg and strum. 
